Simulation of a Queuing Network

The queuing network can be represented as a directed graph. The
nodes of the graph are queues (each with its own queuing discipline
and service time distribution). The links of the graph dictate how
jobs are traversing on the network. Each link is associated with a
delay: a job leaving the queue at the head of the link will take
this amount of simulation time before it reaches the next
queue. For each outgoing link of a queue, a branching probability
is assigned, which is the probability for a job leaving the queue
to choose this link.

We consider three queuing disciplines: FIFO, LIFO, and RANDOM. FIFO
is first-in-first-out.  LIFO is last-in-first-out. RANDOM means
that a job in queue enters service in random order. In any case,
the queue is non-preemptive and has an unlimited buffer to store
the arrival jobs. Also we assume that the service time is a random
variable with an exponential random distribution.

The input to this simulation program is a file that describes the
network, which contains a list of nodes and their connections
in-between. The first line of the file specifies the number of
queues in the network and the average number of initial jobs in
each queue. The initial number of jobs in a queue is a random
variable with a Poisson distribution (with the given mean).  The
remaining lines of the file each describes a queue in the network
and observes the following format. The first column is the queue
id, followed by the queuing discipline (either FIFO, LIFO, or
RANDOM), and then followed by the mean service time.  The fourth
column is the number of outgoing links of this queue. For each
outgoing link, we list the id of the queue the link is connected
to, the branching probability (which should sum to one), and the
link delay.
